Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
That relationship of yours
with the players...
When I was in Beşiktaş in 2014,
and you were in Fenerbahçe,
you played an exhibition game
against the San Antonio Spurs. -Yes.
At that time, Luka Žorić (Žora)
and Bojan Bogdanović were playing,
and on my coaching staff, I had
Miljenko Rak, who loved basketball.
That's right. -He's the Frank
Sinatra of Croatian sports,
and I want to greet him.
Then Žora spoke about those
situations with enthusiasm.
He told us about those moments
when he would go out,
and you wouldn't just see him
and greet him, but you'd
invite him to your table.
But the next day in Ataşehir,
it was as if nothing had happened.
Only work mattered.
That's what's fascinating.
You yourself said a moment ago
that you're not easy to work with.
And at the same time,
you say that you don't just have
two children, but 17 or 170.
What you said...
What I want to say is more
of a thought than a question,
but I think I'm right,
and I'm glad about it.
When a person watches short
clips of you, they will think-
and you often say it yourself-
that you're surprised
and you wonder, "What this is?"
-That's right.
You say, "Aleksa," or "Do you want me
to hit you with the clipboard?"
A person might think
you've lost your mind.
However, when someone watches
a podcast or a longer statement,
they can see that there's a lot of empathy,
love, intelligence, wisdom,
so much energy, but also calmness.
Then I realized that your
relationship is complete.
And you just demand everything.
When something is complete,
it has both sides.
And Aleksa will tolerate it when
you yell at him, just because
he knows you have
that other side too.
Because I can lightly hit my own child,
but I can't hit the neighbor's child.
And you can behave like that towards
them because you give them everything.
You have a complete relationship
with them, and that drains
and consumes energy.
-You're right.
But without that, it's not possible,
or at least I can't do it.
I tried to explain to the players
that while I'm addressing them,
I'm interested in them.
When I stop addressing them,
it means they're no longer important to me.
I'm always looking for better results.
Otherwise, all those scenes during
timeouts are an integral part of the job.
But I don't think it's fair.
I don't have a problem with
whether it's broadcast or not.
But in the NBA, which is the best
competition, they create sequences
that are allowed to be broadcast.
What I want to say is, everything
is recorded, but only one part
of the conversation is broadcast.
If I could, I'd like to go into someone's
office here and record them.
What would we hear then? -Yes.
Let's go to someone's house when
the family is sitting at the table
eating lunch, and when the father
talks to the children or his wife,
what would we hear then?
I don't have any problem with it.
Those I address like that know it.
I want to go back to Žora's story.
I've been doing this my whole life
because I'm that kind of person.
When we're out somewhere,
they are my best friends.
I'm talking about the coaching staff.
We enjoy life.
When we enter the hall, someone
has put me there to be the one
who gives guidelines and directions.
And we have to know that.
When we're outside, we're equal.
If you came and sat on my head,
I wouldn't have a problem with it.
When we enter the hall,
I'm the one who determines
what we'll do and how we'll do it.
Of course, in cooperation with others.
Others have the right to an opinion,
especially the players.
I say my opinion, but in the end,
we will all move in the same direction.
If someone goes one way
and someone else goes the other,
then nothing will come of that job.
I give to the players,
but I also demand from them.
That's exactly it. It's true that
I demand a lot. But I know why I do it.
When I give a player everything,
I have the right to ask
for the same from him.
That's the only way...
Is there greater happiness than...
Now we've returned after these
two days, and at the airport,
we were greeted in the morning...
I think it was 2:30 a.m.,
and there were many Partizan fans.
Two weeks ago,
the same thing happened.
It was 5:00 a.m, and there
were even more fans.
Does any of us have the right to put
a finger to our forehead and wonder?
Imagine how beautiful this is
that we're doing, when we've made
so many people happy.
Is there anything more
beautiful than that? -No.
Do you compare basketball
with other sports?
Of course, the motivation is the same,
but do you use other sports
in a tactical sense?
The late Ivić used handball.
It's great to step out
on a player who has the ball.
The others make corrections,
leaving free space on the wings,
but the principle is the same
as in football.
Or, for example, England
coach Southgate used the NFL
as an example for some set pieces
or certain situations. -I understand.
Do you follow other sports?
-Every top sport is beautiful to watch.
What is the essence of top sports?
That while you're watching it,
you think you can do it too.
That's something fascinating.
I know that Ivić used pressing
from basketball as an example.
Because Hajduk played pressing
all over the field at that time.
I don't want to go into detail about
football and zonal defenses now.
How to defend with ten players.
With Guardiola, the goalkeeper
must know how to play
well with his feet.
I'm lucky to have
many friends in all sports.
I have many friends
who play water polo.
And I talk a lot with them.
Water polo is a specific sport.
Veselin Vujović was once the best
handball player in the world,
and later became a coach.
And I tried to explain to my dear Vujo.
Vujo, don't expect the players
to be like you. That's the trick.
Aggressiveness is something
that in those sports where
there is contact, and I mean
football, basketball, handball,
you can achieve
something with that.
Even in handball, there are blocks
similar to those in basketball.
Not as much, but they exist.
And there, they play two against two.
In football, during set pieces, players
make blocks for each other. -Exactly.
That's why it's used. -Space
is very important in basketball.
Space and timing.
And I can imagine how it is
in football, on such a large space.
How important space is in football.
If we have... You have less.
That's right.
Imagine how much you
footballers work on space.
So there are points of contact.
We're talking about tactics.
Not to mention psychology,
togetherness, team, etc.
That's roughly it.
When I think about basketball,
handball, and water polo,
for you, the middle of the field is
a transit zone. -Almost irrelevant.
You have offense and defense.
So you can draw an action that will bring
your player into an opportunity.
Whether to be alone on the shot
or in a goal-scoring opportunity.
Or play one-on-one, but he's the best.
And you expect him to solve it.
Yes. -In football, that's difficult.
-It's different. I can draw a goal.
But it's not the same.
The only solution is an extra player.
The essence of every sport
is to create an extra player.
You insist on focus, don't you?
-That's right.
Focus is the most important.
-Yes. Easy baskets.
Concentration. It's the same
in football, but it's also...
You always insist that how you
train is how you play,
you always have to move
on your toes.
If someone scores a basket,
he starts to celebrate...
During that time,
there's a counterattack.
How I look at it.
For you, at any moment
when you lose the ball,
a late reaction from your player
leads to an undefendable counterattack.
And in football, it's different,
if the midfielder on the right wing
didn't pass the ball, he can stay back,
the defender can create an extra player.
He'll react, "Why did you pass
the ball like that to me?"
You won't be happy, however,
it rarely results in a goal.
Because behind him, there are still
nine or seven players.
It's much easier to play like that.
The similarities are as follows:
footballers have a huge desire
to run and score a goal.
But they don't have the same
desire to defend. -Certainly.
It's the same in basketball.
Everyone wants to run
in the counterattack,
but no one wants to run
back to defend.
And again, we're talking about
the level of the ball
and the extra player
in defense and attack.
The more players there are,
the easier everything is.
It's probably the same in football.
Many attacking players don't want
to block the opposing player in time,
and an easy goal is conceded.
Especially since today in football,
the transition game is emphasized.
You probably advise players
to play faster after defense.
We talked a moment ago about
how much faster the ball
is than the player.
-Yes. -That's it.
What I insist on in basketball
and the players
know is timing, space, and time.
Without that, there's
no good basketball. No way.
Later come the details, blocks,
at what angle and how.
Three days ago, a friend sent me
a recording of a game.
The game was played in Belgrade
in 1984 between Partizan and Cibona,
where we won by two points.
That was the first year
I came to Partizan.
Moka was the coach, and Dražen,
Aco, Knego, Čutura, Ušić, Nakić,
Bečić played in Cibona.
It was a phenomenal team.
Watching that game,
I noticed that there was no blocks.
And today someone asks the question,
has basketball changed?
They mainly played
zonal defense, as did we.
I don't remember playing
two games this year
where the opposing team tried
to play zonal defense.
Maybe there were two such defenses
the whole season, and now we're
playing the twenty-sixth round.
And once only zonal defense
was played.
And the second thing is that
all players are inside.
The progress is noticeable.
That year, the rule was changed,
and they introduced three points.
And they introduced the line on the court
after the Los Angeles Olympics.
That happened in 1984.
At that time, when someone scored
three points, it was a big deal.
Today it's like a layup,
like going for a layup.
Tell me, in your opinion,
is basketball a fairer sport
than football when it
comes to results?
In football, it often happens
that we lose a game,
and sometimes we win in such a way.
But when we lose,
we say that in basketball,
we would have won by ten points.
But here it's 0:1.
When it comes to basketball, it seems
to me that the better team always wins.
Not better on paper,
but better on the court that day.
Basketball is a specific sport
because the game cannot end in a draw.
Someone always has to win.
But there are such similarities.
Sometimes a team plays well
but still loses.
Concedes a basket in the last second.
You play a good game,
but then something happens...
This year, my team conceded
baskets in the final seconds.
In one game we lost, we conceded
12 points in the last second.
The ball simply hits the backboard
after the shot and goes in.
It's some higher power.
But no matter-we move on.
Sometimes we got lucky too.
It all evens out in the end.
In football, refereeing is one
of the most important factors.
VAR has helped make
the game fairer.
But even with VAR, some
decisions are made-or not made.
You know that better than I do.
To me, as an ordinary viewer,
some decisions aren't clear.
They often say VAR didn't react,
so why didn't the referee?
Does it seem to you,
or is the grass always greener
on the neighbor's side than on ours?
However, my opinion,
it's easier to keep players satisfied
in basketball than in football.
Because the squad is smaller,
and there's also more rotation.
Because when will I bring my fifth
center-back into the game?
He has to wait for his chance.
-For someone to get injured.
Maybe for someone to get a card,
be in bad form, or get injured.
And in basketball, you can...
-I agree. In basketball, it's different.
That team spirit.
You have 12 players and it's been
known for several seasons
that in every team has several players
missing due to injuries or something else.
And then other players get a chance.
Of course, it depends on them
how they take the opportunity,
but I agree it's easier in basketball.
Especially because it's a more
dynamic sport in the sense
that you can make substitutions.
Because in football,
once you make a substitution,
you can't bring the player back.
I think it's good thing today
in football, you have
the right to more substitutions.
Earlier, you were only allowed two.
-There were three...
At first two, then three
for a long time, and now five.
With five, you can already...
-Do what you want.
Change tactics and everything else.
-That gives coaches a lot...
And in basketball, that's it.
You have the right to substitute
a player for just two seconds.
Of course, before that,
you have to explain to them...
Substitutions are not only made
when someone plays poorly.
That's not the only
type of substitution.
There are 1.000 other reasons for
substitutions. -That's right!
If the players know and understand
that, then that is all there is to it.
In basketball, by default,
when you concede a basket
in the last two minutes, you can
automatically request a substitution.
Substitutions are made
to slow down the pace,
to prevent the other team from
switching to a full-court press.
I understand... -You also make
substitutions after free throws...
There are many reasons for it,
and coaches take advantage of that.
The review rule is sometimes used
just to avoid wasting a timeout.
You ask for a play to be reviewed even
when you know the call was correct,
just to get a chance
to draw up a play,
to give your players a breather
without officially calling a timeout.
Yes, yes... Tell me, please,
once a great coach of Real Madrid
and Manchester City,
now at Betis, Pellegrini. -I know.
...he said that a coach's influence
in football is 95% during training,
but only 5% during the match. Is
that percentage higher in basketball
because you're closer to the players,
you have substitutions, timeouts,
and you can whisper something
to someone during free throws?
Even with challenges,
you have more opportunities to...
In football, you often wait for
halftime or a serious injury
to say something to your players.
-I think basketball is a sport
where coaches have a significant
influence during the game.
It's just the nature of the sport.
It has substitutions, timeouts,
and the speed at which the game is
played-coaches can influence
the outcome much more, I believe,
than in any other sport.
I can't speak about other sports
because I don't know them as well,
but I know that here, we as coaches
definitely have a major impact.
Apart from your preparation
before the game,
what you do during the game
is extremely important.
The role of the coach in
those moments is invaluable. -Yes.
Everybody knows that,
and smart players know that too.
All those decisions you make...
You have to think quickly,
you have to know your team
as well as the opponent's,
you have to react to substitutions...
We have this saying in basketball:
"He didn't respond to me."
For example, the opposing team
starts a new play with three big men
while you're playing
with three smaller players.
You must have a reason for
sticking with the smaller lineup
while he's using the big ones.
And then, if he wins, they say,
"You didn't respond to him."
But if you don't respond and still
win, they say, "You outsmarted him."
The winner is always the one
who comes out on top.
Now we also have these expert
analysts and all these smart people
who know everything, but of course,
they always speak up after the game.
And then you feel like asking them,
"Why don't you come and sit
on this bench for a while?
Let's see how you handle it here."
It's easy to analyze everything
after the game-we all know that.
Tell me, when it comes to coaching,
people always talk about two things:
one is knowledge of the game,
whether it's basketball, football,
water polo, handball-and the
other is psychology, management,
relationships with players,
and all that.
Some are better at one thing,
others at the other.
How do you see that? Is there
something you find more important?
More decisive, perhaps?
-Both are important.
The foundation is to have knowledge
and the authority that comes from
that knowledge-something players,
above all, recognize.
That's the first prerequisite.
If you don't have that, then you can't
do anything; it just doesn't work.
And then, of course, it's about
building relationships with players,
where they need to understand
that you genuinely care about them
and that you're looking out for them.
But at the end of the day,
I always emphasize to them
that my primary interest is
the one that stands above
all others-the team's interest.
None of them can be more important
than the team itself.
That's where everything
begins and ends. -Yes.
Maintaining that balance isn't easy,
but you have to work on it.
You have to convince them
and communicate with them daily.
Many times, and we've already
mentioned this several times
in this conversation,
you say it once, you say it again.
Sometimes you have to say it 5 times,
10 times, 15 times, 20 times...
I even have this saying: "I've said it
a million and one times,"
but sometimes even that isn't enough.
What can you do?
That's just how things are.
That's essentially what Ferguson
says-you're the decision-maker,
you have to make decisions.
When I look back at my career,
everything good or bad that happened
to me, 95% of it was the result of
whether I made a decision,
what kind of decision I made,
or whether I didn't make one at all.
It's less about whether we played
4-2-3-1 or 3-5-2; it all comes down
to the day-to-day decisions,
whether they're comfortable or
uncomfortable, easy or difficult.
It's just that simple.
However, as Ferguson says, "adapt or
die", and we discussed that earlier.
But how much has the job changed,
not in terms of dealing with players,
we already covered that-but in terms
of demands from the management,
from the fans, and the media, now that
everyone seems to know everything?
And then there's this new mentality,
which I see in my kids
that want the holy trinity:
"give it to me now, give me
everything, and keep on giving."
Impatience is definitely there,
and that's just the nature of our job.
I was fortunate enough
never to be fired as a coach.
Any breaks I took were my decisions.
Like when I took a year off after
Panathinaikos or Fenerbahçe...
I believe that public impatience,
whether from fans or others
who have certain interests,
maybe because they want to bring in
a different coach-is always present.
However, those who have been
patient with their coaches
and the clubs where coaches
have stayed for a longer period
have always seen good results.
-Yes. -That's the essence of it.
Of course, when we talk
about good results,
it always comes down to what the
goals are, what the objectives are.
And it's not just in basketball.
Take football, for example,
everyone knows who the favorites are,
and everyone knows which teams are
expected to be at least in the top 8,
or the top 4, or the finals.
A club like Real Madrid,
arguably the best club in the world,
won't be satisfied just by
reaching the top 4 in Europe.
No one in the world would call that
a good result. That's just how it is.
Not even if they finish second...
But there's one thing
I've always pointed out...
Michael Jordan played, what,
15 seasons in the NBA?
He was a champion six times.
Does that mean he was unsuccessful
in the other nine seasons? -Yeah...
I don't think so.
Somebody has to win.
Now we have the EuroLeague, 18 teams,
it's a phenomenal competition,
but only one can be the champion.
Does that mean all the other teams
were failures? I don't think so,
but the way sports are today,
they demand victories, victories...
You have club presidents and others
who are patient, who understand,
who are objective-which isn't easy,
it's not easy to provide support,
and then you have others who become
impatient at the start of the season.
I've always said... The season starts,
and after just three or four rounds,
the president fires the coach.
So, who's at fault-the coach
or the president? You chose him.
You must have made the wrong decision
if you're replacing him so quickly.
Or take my own example,
at the start of this season,
we were 2-8 in the EuroLeague.
Should I have replaced the players?
Should I have said we're playing
poorly because they're playing poorly?
No, I believed in those players,
and I still believe in them to this day.
It's the same situation
with the relationship between
the club and the coach as it is
with the coach and the players,
it's about patience.
I chose you,
and I believe in you.
I tell them, "Look, I can't be
against you. Why? Because I chose you.
Of course, you also
chose me and my club.
If I chose you,
that means I trust you,
and I will continue to trust you."
A lot of time has to pass, or
something extraordinary has to happen,
for me to give up on a player,
let alone stop talking to him...
If we stop talking,
then that's the end,
it's better for him
to find a new place.
These days, people often
talk about pressure,
not just in sports but in life.
Do you think that the pressure
has become too much
because of social media,
Instagram, and all of that,
especially for players and coaches?
Part of your job is to help
relieve that pressure a bit.
I saw this fascinating example
a few years ago
while watching a Premier League.
Liverpool was playing against someone,
and one of their players,
someone who obviously already has
a certain level of mental strength,
was being interviewed after the match.
I guess he played poorly in the first
half but improved in the second.
The commentator asked him to explain
his performance in both halves.
And he said that during halftime,
he heard that someone in the studio
had criticized him, and that's what
fired him up and made him play better.
Think about that-he was checking,
verifying, and asking for feedback
at halftime to see
what people were saying.
That's how far it's gone,
it's become overwhelming.
And it's not just hard on the players
but also on the coaches.
Do you remember when I told you
that you can now find out
what someone on the other side
of the world, in New Zealand,
thinks about you? Back in the day,
we just had newspapers...
You used to wait until the following
day to see what they wrote about you
in Sport or Slobodna Dalmacija.
Yes, social media is something else
entirely and can be quite destructive.
I don't care about it at all,
and I never look at the comments,
let alone allow anyone
to influence me.
It's definitely
something very negative.
Players, however,
are prone to checking it,
and I had a situation once
with one of my players.
Entirely by accident, after giving my
halftime speech in the locker room,
I realized I had forgotten
the stat sheet, so I went back in...
and there he was, on his phone.
Honestly, I almost fainted.
I'm not exaggerating.
After that, I told them,
"From now on, before the game,
you hand over your phones
to the team manager, and you won't
get them until after the match."
You have to fight against it and
try to explain it to them, sadly...
Look at us-we've been sitting here,
having a great time,
and neither of us looked at
our phones even once. -Yes, yes.
That's rare nowadays.
Everyone's glued to their phones
even when you go out with your closest
friends. That's just how it is today.
Everyone feels entitled to an opinion,
and they often hide behind nicknames.
Nobody dares to come out
and say something to your face,
to look you in the eye and
share their thoughts or opinions.
It's easy to attack
and hate on social media...
Keyboard warriors-that's what
they call them nowadays. -Exactly.
And nobody is going to change that.
In fact, I think it's only
going to get worse. -Yes.
But it'll get worse only for those
who allow it to affect them.
For those who don't care about it,
they'll continue to live normally.
I hope to keep living without it,
just like I have until now.
It doesn't even cross my mind.
I don't use social media platforms,
and I'm not interested in them.
My phone is still
just for what's necessary,
to send and receive messages
and to call someone.
Nothing can replace the human voice.
You mentioned earlier
that you've never been fired.
You know, the legendary Italian coach,
Trapattoni, said 20 years ago
that there are only coaches
who have been fired
and those who will be fired.
But that was two decades ago,
and things have only
gotten worse since then.
It's not getting any better, is it?
I'm curious about something...
On one hand, you're the most decorated
coach, and apart from maybe Guardiola,
you're the only one at this level
who's never been fired.
From the outside, even as a fan
following your career,
it looks flawless and perfect.
Maybe you're not the most qualified
to talk about that side of the job,
when they start attacking you,
when the rumors start flying,
when you're questioned, dismissed,
and you begin to doubt yourself...
But surely, there must have been...
Were there any significant crises?
I'm not talking about losing games,
that happens, even in finals,
but were there longer periods
when you felt like you were weakening,
like your position was in jeopardy...
When was it the hardest for you?
Who did you turn to
for advice in those moments?
Do you prefer to be alone,
or with your coaching staff
or family during those times?
There was this situation, one year,
when we played poorly
for several games in a row.
I told my coaching staff
that I thought that was it,
that I no longer had
any influence over the players,
and that we needed to do something.
And the smartest thing I could think
of at that moment was to resign.
There was a bit of silence in the
room, and no one said anything.
I took that as a sign that they agreed
with me, but in reality, they didn't.
I went to the players and told them,
"Guys, thank you. It's been great,
but I don't think we can achieve
anything more together. That's it."
I went home. First, the president
called me to convince me
it wasn't the right decision.
Then, people from the club
started calling, and after that,
all my staff members
reached out to me.
And then the players started coming
over, begging me not to leave.
So, I told them,
"Alright. Do you realize
the situation we're in right now?
If you want me to stay,
you have to change. You need to...
We need to do something together to
get out of this difficult moment,
because there's no point in me staying
if everything stays the same."
So, I want you to tell me
what I'm doing wrong,
and feel free to tell me openly,
"Coach, we think this...,"
and I will also speak openly with you.
Can we do that?
If we're ready for that,
then let's go.
We had a meeting, and from that point
on, things started to improve.
We ended up having
an exceptional season.
In those moments,
do you like to be alone? -Sorry?
do you like to be alone?
People often say, and many
great coaches say it too,
that a coach is alone in defeat,
when you lose, you're alone.
Do you like to be alone
during those times?
Like the legendary
Ćiro Blažević used to say,
"You lock yourself
in the darkness of your own skin,"
or do you reach out to your family,
friends, coaching staff...?
No, I don't reach out.
I'm alone, and I think about it.
There are always people I trust, and
they always appear at that moment.
I'm talking to them.
The decision I made, was a decision
in the interest of the team.
I had no problem with myself.
It was in the interest of the team.
It was a club where I worked a lot.
Whether that was saturation or not,
it later turned out that there wasn’t,
because we achieved results that year as well.
Obviously, some... Now I could
call it a kind of shock moment.
Someone has to shock someone.
Did I shock them when I said I was leaving,
or did they shock me when they said,
"Don't, coach, we believe in you.
We want you to stay with us."
And then these people from the club.
That gives you some extra energy
and some motivation.
That's how it was at that moment.
I really believed at that moment
that it might be best for me to leave.
Luckily, I had people who believed in me.
Colleagues and everyone from the club.
It was what it was.
It's not the end of the world
to make such a decision.
I don’t think it’s the end of the world
if I get dismissed tomorrow.
I just wouldn’t want it to
happen at Partizan.
But, well, as Trapattoni said,
he put it best.
We depend on this... This is our life.
You move on, that's how it is.
Someone makes decisions...
I've always said, you never know,
a tough situation,
how much it can actually
be good for a person.
It can help you take the next step.
-When it passes. -When it passes.
But until it passes...
-Of course, we suffer.
That’s human nature. -And Guardiola...
Say it. -Yes, yes.
Even for Guardiola, this will be useful.
Is he comfortable right now? No. -That’s right.
He has to go through it.
Many fail because of it.
Maybe if Guardiola weren’t Guardiola, he would
have probably been sacked at some point.
But Guardiola has built...
You can only do this...
Bravo, maestro, and that’s it.
-How do you handle defeat?
Conte once said a phenomenal sentence.
The problem in this job is that
you don’t enjoy victory
as much as you suffer in defeat.
-Yes. I have to tell you one thing.
If you ever decide not to go into coaching,
you’d be phenomenal at this.
You're an encyclopedia.
-No, no. -I’m serious. Unbelievable.
You’ve already quoted so many people.
Yes, defeat is something nobody likes.
But it's necessary. -When we talk
among ourselves, coaches,
we say what a beautiful day it is.
The morning when you wake up after a win.
There’s no better day.
When I became the coach of Partizan,
I lost two games in the season, in our league.
The first was against Bosna from Sarajevo,
after overtime, and one against Rabotnički.
When we lost to Rabotnički,
I didn’t leave the house for seven days.
I thought anyone walking down the street
was pointing at me and saying,
"Look at this fool."
I really thought that.
-That’s the responsibility.
But now, when I lose a game,
you lost a game, and you move on.
I don’t even dwell on it. I told you,
back then in the locker room,
right after the game, I would do
an analysis, talk for 5, 10, 15 minutes.
Now: "Guys, training is tomorrow
or the day after. Bye."
That’s the only way. You can’t
win everything, it’s impossible.
You have to lose sometimes.
Of course, it’s better when you win.
You’re happier, more satisfied.
Everyone is happy, and the atmosphere
after a win is incredible. There’s
probably nothing better. -That’s it.
Everyone is like brothers, sisters,
friends. -Yes, there’s no feeling like it.
Tell me...
You're very proud of your relationship
with former players.
What do you tell them when
they ask for advice after retiring?
Should they go into... Should they
become coaches or do something else?
What’s your advice?
They definitely ask you. -Yes.
Life after a playing career
is just beginning.
I tell them life is waiting for them,
and they should choose to do what they love.
The dilemma is always whether to be
a president, sports director, or coach.
Should I open a café,
a restaurant, etc.?
Do what you think you should do,
what you love to do. That’s number one.
Number two, I was lucky that...
Until a few years ago,
there were over 100, now I don’t know,
players I coached who are now coaches.
At various levels. Some were even
in ministries, presidents of federations.
Dejan Bodiroga is now
the president of the EuroLeague.
Successful people. There were
some who didn’t quite find their way.
Some strayed and went into
completely different fields,
though I don’t understand why,
but that’s their right.
I was always open to them
and always told them what I thought
was good for them, but I always said,
and I’ll say it again, do what you love to do.
Don’t wake up one morning with
the idea that you want to be a coach...
A great player, a really great player,
asked me a few years ago:
"Žoc..." That’s my nickname.
"I want to be a coach, but do I really
have to be at every training session?"
I told him, don’t get into this job.
What am I trying to say?
You wake up thinking,
"I want to be this," and the next day,
"I want to be this, I want to be that."
If you’re lost and don’t have a clear idea,
there’s nothing worse than that.
Do something else.
Life is incredible, you can find
yourself where you’re meant to be.
I understand 100%.
-Be dedicated.
I’m at that age when players retire,
and I tell them that professional sports,
especially those that bring money,
football, basketball, and other sports...
There are many roles
that can fulfill you.
They are well paid,
but being important matters.
The most important thing for a player
is to stay relevant.
He wants to be important,
like everyone else.
You can be a director, an advisor,
a chief scout-there are many roles.
I tell them, when you’re a director,
you’re just a token, like in pinball.
And coaches are the balls.
As a director, you have three lives,
three coaches you can replace.
That’s one downside.
For example, I never in my life,
though I had offers,
wanted to be anything else.
I always told everyone, the only thing
I want and love to do is to be a coach.
The court. I can’t see
myself as a club president,
a sports director, or anything else
in life. I can only be a coach.
Everything else I love to do, in my
free time, is my right, and I will do it.
But that’s not a profession.
We’re talking about this.
I’m just a coach,
focused on this.
Maybe I could do something else, but
I’m not going to test myself at this age.
It doesn’t even cross my mind.
This is more than enough for me.
I know how I do my job.
I’m at peace with myself.
Now, what you said was nice. Players
have their whole lives ahead of them,
sometimes they struggle
and need help.
Everyone who came to me
and asked for my opinion,
I always tried to help and I will help.
These are people I love.
I can’t forget those moments
when I lived with someone for ten years
and now suddenly they don’t matter.
-Absolutely...
Do you know why
you can’t be something else?
That’s what I tell the players.
If you start being a coach, it’s over.
There’s no turning back.
It takes you in completely. Why?
Because, in essence,
it’s the only real thing.
It’s the only place
where you feel adrenaline,
responsibility, and everything else.
Yes, but there are players who
understand what that job means,
and who say, "I could never do this."
-True. -That’s respect.
And then you have the others, who live
for it, and while they are players...
From every generation, I could point out
who could become a coach.
The players I coached.
I told Jasikevičius many years ago
that he would be a coach
one day. Of course.
Just like I told all the others. I could
exactly tell from each generation,
"You will be a coach one day."
Now, from this Partizan team,
I can name precisely
who will become a coach.
I can write it down, that’s
what I’ll do, it would be great,
to bet on who will become a coach.
Did you just beat Spanoulis? -Yes.
Fascinating.
You said...
If you sat on the bench,
it wouldn’t make sense, right?
If I did? -If you sat on the bench,
instead of standing during the game,
it wouldn’t be the same,
it wouldn’t make sense.
That’s the passion of these
greats who simply...
have to be there, on the sideline,
and at the same time, it’s madness.
I’m talking about your completeness.
At the same time, you highlight
your absolute focus on the game
as your greatest quality. -Yes.
I know that.
Whenever I have...
looked or look strange,
I know the level of focus I have.
And how necessary that is
to lead the game the right way
and to be able to help your team.
I tune everything out.
Everything that happens in the arena,
many times, I truly don’t hear it.
I don’t hear the cheering or the noise.
If we’re playing away,
and someone is
calling me out. No.
I always told my players
when they take free throws...
Focus. Concentrate.
If you can hear the ball hitting the floor,
but not the people on the sides,
not even when they whistle at you.
I managed to train myself for that,
and I think that’s the most important thing.
Earlier, we talked about how much
a coach can influence a basketball game.
On the other hand,
when I sit on the bench,
I ask my assistants to talk.
Those were famous scenes when
I worked at Panathinaikos-Dimitris,
who became a great coach, and I.
The referees would come to calm us down,
because they thought we had a problem,
that we were about to fight.
I told him, "Dimče, talk."
"I’m going to say the worst
things to you during the game,
but I will listen to you."
And I did listen to him.
I did what he told me to do,
but I insulted him.
That still happens to me today,
not just with one assistant.
I’ve said that not only are they
valuable to me,
they help me so much that I think
without assistant coaches, I’d be nothing.
I truly believe that. -True.
Just like I believe
that a basketball club
can’t function without physiotherapists,
equipment managers, doctors.
All those supporting staff
who take care of the players.
I’ve always said,
when I observe my players,
I pay much more attention
to how they treat
the equipment manager
and the physiotherapist
than how they treat me.
They always behave nicely toward me.
They know I’m the boss
and that they depend on me.
Of course. -But I watch
how they act.
That shows me what
kind of people they are.
If you're a good person with me,
you can have a bad game,
you can make mistakes,
but I will understand.
If you’re not... well,
it’s going to be tough.
Do you feel that players today
lack individuality on the court?
Tell me...
This year, there was a moment
when one player "exploded,"
and when I took him out to calm him down,
he told me, "Let me be myself."
Of course! You need to be yourself.
But I can’t allow you
to put the team in a situation
where you get another technical foul
and get kicked out. Do you understand
why I subbed you out? -Yes, yes.
Be yourself, you should be yourself,
it’s best when you’re you.
Basically, you’re saying-your completeness,
we play defense this way, that’s it.
I’ll draw up the offense for you, and now
you think everything is planned out.
But then you say, "I’d love for you
to surprise me with something."
Give me something of your own!
That’s becoming less common today.
In football, dribbling is becoming rarer.
-Smart players-when there’s a time-out,
I draw up a play,
and on the first possession,
he does something completely different.
Of course, we miss-or rather,
he misses. Bad decision.
On the second possession,
he does exactly what I drew up,
and the player gets a wide-open shot.
He missed, but he was wide open.
After the game, I ask him,
"Do you remember what I said?" "Yes."
"Why?" "I was reading the defense."
That’s basketball.
I tell him, "Of course."
"Why did you follow the second play?"
"Was he open?" "Yes."
"Why don’t you trust me?
Do you not trust me?"
"I trust you, coach." "Then do it."
When the game is "alive,"
when you're running up and down,
then you can "read"
and do whatever you want.
I’m happiest when
a player surprises me.
That rarely happens.
When a player surprises me,
I’m the happiest person in the world.
Yes, when he surprises
you outside the system,
then that improvisation is amazing.
The most beautiful thing.
But if it’s only improvisation,
then it’s chaos. -That’s right.
Isn’t that so? -Yes, it is.
-That’s the fine line. -Exactly.
Has your ego ever held you back,
or does it hold you back at all
when it comes to your NBA story?
I read that you mentioned
a few times that they called you
for interviews and all that.
Of course, it seems illogical to you.
How can that be explained,
that it hasn’t happened-not to you,
nor to these other coaches...
But to you, for example.
I don’t know. Honestly,
I’ve never been in a situation
where someone seriously
talked to me about it.
There was that one time when
they called me for an interview,
and I jokingly said
that interviews are for journalists.
They all know who I am, etc.
That whole story about adaptation...
I think that any coach in Europe
who is at a certain EuroLeague level
can also coach in the NBA.
It’s just a matter of those people
giving you their trust.
We all understand and know
how relationships are built.
You’ve moved from
one level to another.
Of course, the NBA is a bit different,
but it’s not that different.
Joe Dumars had a saying,
he said that basketball is universal.
Basketball is the same everywhere.
So, well...
So, I didn’t have any offers,
so I didn’t rush anywhere.
I’m very happy here.
Europe was my destination,
starting from Badalona, Madrid,
Treviso, Athens, Istanbul.
Now I’ve returned here home,
after 28 years.
My happiness knows no bounds.
I’m living the life I love.
I’m surrounded by people
who respect me,
and on top of all that,
I have love.
I always say that I have enough love
and that there are people
who surely love me.
And this is something special.
Wherever I worked, I was
highly respected and loved.
Because of that, there was no need
for me, to run or hurry anywhere.
I didn’t have an ego that would
push me to prove myself.
Many people from the NBA
who were, or are now coaches,
came to my practices.
They are my friends.
They took from me,
and I took from them.
In this modern era, you click and see
that everyone is copying each other...
Click and you watch Guardiola...
This one isn’t good,
he has long passes, etc.
These are all told stories.
I was satisfied with myself
right where I was,
and to this day, I’m very satisfied.
And I’m very happy.
Even at this moment.
This specific conversation
makes me very happy. -Thank you.
Thank you for this wonderful
conversation we’re having.
But we have to ask you this,
even though it's not the topic
of the show, it’s relevant.
I have to ask you since we’ve
already mentioned the NBA.
Can you comment on the decision
that is currently relevant,
and is related to Dončić?
How do you see it?
All those who are there and who understand
it much more than I do, are surprised.
It has once again shown that all the players
have commented that it's a business.
At the end of the day,
there is no sentimentality, no love.
If five days before it happened,
someone had mentioned
something like that, they would probably
have said that he’s crazy,
that he’s a patient for psychiatry.
They would have said
that something like that
couldn’t happen, but it happened.
What the interests are,
how, and why, time will show.
Whether that Dallas manager
was right or not, who knows,
but some new players in Dallas
will definitely get an opportunity.
Luka will get the opportunity
to show his incredible talent
and everything he offers in the Lakers.
I don’t know how it will look,
but that’s how it is.
But again, I say, it’s a business.
-Yes. -Business above all.
That’s why the NBA
is the best league.
I had the opportunity to spend
just over a month in Detroit.
That organization is a miracle.
It’s something incredible.
They definitely pay attention
to everything.
To everything, down to
the smallest detail.
If we in EuroLeague,
at this level of competition,
made every game important,
the viewership would grow even more.
Even the Americans
have started broadcasting it.
If we took some things from them,
it would be phenomenal.
You said: "First, you need
to remain a person."
And: "For Partizan, I’ll give
everything except my dignity."
You were 13 years in Greece,
7 years in Turkey...
I was also in Turkey. Phenomenal
people, phenomenal country...
You were in a giant. -Yes.
I was there for 2 years.
Let’s ignore the 13 years in Greece,
but staying 7 years at Fenerbahçe
you can't do if you’re just a good coach.
They had many coaches.
Zico was there too, he won
the championship, but he had to leave.
My neighbor was Aziz Yildirim.
He fires the coach at halftime.
You didn’t win all seven titles. -Yes.
How do you explain that?
Do you feel special
because of the fact that people
respect you, appreciate you,
love you, wherever you go?
It turned out to be that way.
I am proud of that fact.
The person you mentioned,
Aziz Yildirim, after my first contract,
insisted that we extend the cooperation
and sign a five-year contract.
I was cautious because I realized
that it was a huge period.
I said: "Let’s not tie ourselves
down that much,
let’s sign something more realistic."
In the end, we agreed that
it would be a three-year contract.
He insisted a lot.
He’s a wonderful person.
The relationship I had with him
was incredible.
Even today, when I go to Istanbul,
I meet with him,
despite the fact that he has
a small problem with communication
because of the language... - Yes.
He is a wonderful person, and we
understood each other very well,
despite everything. What else
can I say, except that I am proud,
happy, and satisfied with the fact
that people recognized my dedication.
I think that’s the most important thing.
Also, they recognized what I built.
Because, during my time there,
basketball gained significance.
There is a statistic on how many
children in 2017. followed
that final game on various
squares in Turkey.
This led to the creation
of new generations of fans
of Fenerbahçe and
basketball in general.
After that, Efes won two titles.
Then there’s also Partizan.
I’m especially proud of the fact
that we have new generations of fans.
There are many kids,
kids who enjoy it.
Those are your clubs. -Excuse me?
-Those are your clubs, sorry.
I’m talking about Zadar.
An example is the ABA League
in this region.
Zagreb, Split, Zadar...
Split is a demanding city.
Zadar, we’ve already
talked about that. - Yes.
Some will say,
Zadar is a basketball city.
Yes, it’s a basketball city,
but it’s also a city
that suffered a lot in the war
along with several other cities.
And the people haven’t forgotten that,
because it wasn’t that long ago.
Despite that, the people in Zadar
welcome you like that,
even if you're not
the Zadar coach. -Yes.
Personally, I think people know
coach Željko Obradović
and some of my results.
But what you mentioned earlier,
honor, honesty,
and some of the views I have,
I assume that’s what led to people
treating me like that
in Split, Zadar, and Zagreb.
I’ve always been myself,
and I will always be.
I’ve always said what I think.
I’ve never stepped onto courts
where I thought I wasn’t ready.
I believe that we only, by chance,
were born here or there.
We are, above all, people.
And if we are good people,
then we understand each other.
The best understanding
is between good people,
and the whole essence is in that.
I have many friends.
Life has taken me,
I repeat, from Spain,
through Italy, Greece, Turkey...
The friendships I have made
are unforgettable and there are
always good and bad people,
in every city, in every village.
I returned to Čačak, to the street
where I have lived since 1965.,
where my late father built a house.
Across from that house lives a man
whose friend I have been since
that year and who is my godfather.
They are all still mine.
About thirty of them
received seasonal tickets
for Partizan’n matches
as a gift from me. All of them.
Because, I'm sure,
if they were in my situation,
they would do the same. That's it.
You were born somewhere,
you lived with those people
and today you love them.
Life took you somewhere else
where you also have friends.
Aziz Yildirim,
a friend for life. -Yes.
I won’t list all the cities
where I have worked.
I mentionede to you the celebration
of my fiftiet birthday with 850 guests.
Guests from all over Europe
were invited and they all came.
I did something that was
of a humanitarian character
and I will never be able
to forget that.
That is exactly the greatest wealth
that a person can have. -Well done!
And after 28 years,
as you said earlier,
you’re coming back home
and saying: "I’m flying."
I’m in my city, doing what I love,
but at home. -Yes.
This conversation that
you and I are having,
hopefully shows you how much
I love talking about basketball.
I’m here in Belgrade.
At one point, it happened,
thanks to Zoran Savić,
who was the club director
and president Ostoja Mijajlović
and their persistence.
For a year, they kept calling me,
but in the end,
I had a conversation with myself
and said: "Now or never."
That "now" was phenomenal
and I feel that way now.
We’re living a fairytale with Partizan,
because the goal we have ahead of us
is for Partizan to be a permanent
member of the EuroLeague.
That is our most important goal
and we are working on it.
If someone had told me
that it would look like this
when I agreed to coach Partizan
and that we would have by far
the largest viewership,
I would have said it’s impossible.
But, it happened that way.
Once again, I will mention that loyalty
which the Partizan fans show us
in the toughest moments.
It’s something incredible.
I truly don’t have the words
to express my gratitude to them.
They especially welcome me,
and I insist that they help the players
and I ask them, and I will keep asking
them for that, but that love is rare.
I truly, sincerely believe that
Partizan is a very specific club.
A club like that doesn’t exist
anywhere else.
You can tell, when you
talk about Partizan,
it’s like you’re flying,
just like you said.
And tell me this...
You’re very social
and have many friends.
And that birthday,
although not just that...
But, what’s the situation with hobbies?
There’s also your family...
Food, wine, music, movies,
what are your hobbies?
I have many hobbies.
When I get on a plane...
Book. I read a lot.
And another type of relaxation
is crossword puzzles.
Often, when I lie down in bed,
if I'm not really sleepy,
if I’m not watching a video,
I do a crossword puzzle or a book.
I love to read and I read a lot.
-What do you read? - I read everything.
First of all, I read Serbian writers,
but since I speak Spanish,
Italian, and English, I can read
in those languages as well.
Of course, to perfect those languages,
I read literature in those.
For example, I read a lot
of literature in Spanish.
Of course, there are hit makers,
you can distinguish true literature
from relaxing literature, etc.
That’s one thing, the other thing is,
as you said, company.
Yes, I really love
spending time with people.
Music is, I personally think,
something that is the most
important in people’s lives.
Without music, life would be
so boring, so different...
When you get in the car in
the morning and turn on the radio,
the music immediately wakes you up.
Music always cheers me up
and I love all kinds of music.
I enjoy music.
Earlier, when I had time,
I loved going fishing. Unfortunately,
now I don’t have the time, but once,
thanks to a friend in Barcelona,
I went on a "real" fishing trip.
We were fishing for tuna,
and it was something incredible.
I hope that one day,
when I finish my career
and have more time,
I will be able to do that.
There are some parts of the world,
and also parts of my
beautiful country, Serbia,
that I haven’t managed to visit,
but I will definitely visit
and I will do so with my best friend.
That’s what awaits me.
You know, I’m very young,
so I have time.
All of that is ahead of me.
What does Serbia have in basketball
that Croatia doesn’t have?
Or, what does Croatia have
in football that Serbia doesn’t have?
Is it passion, is it
quality, responsibility,
or the quality of the profession?
Continuity?
Because something is there, right?
-Something is, that’s for sure.
Croatia has incredible
results in football.
Players who have left
an incredible mark,
Well, you and everyone else.
Ćiro Blažević and now this
national team led by Dalić.
So, I think these are
fantastic results.
We’re good at basketball, yes.
I don’t know what the secret is.
I think it’s about the relationship
that the players have
towards the national team.
In both cases. Both in Croatian football
and my guys in basketball.
It’s something incredible.
They have the right leaders,
both among the coaches
and among the players,
and then that gets passed down
from generation to generation.
I know that in Croatia there are
very good basketball players,
but something is missing,
I really don’t know what.
Just as Serbia has
outstanding football players,
who play in various
European clubs,
but never in the national team.
I’m good friends with Piksi.
I know how dedicated he is,
I know how much he loves it.
He is probably someone more
qualified to talk about it.
When we look back
at his results,
we’ll remember that Serbian
national team in football
didn’t even make it to the Euro
or World Cup, but we succeeded.
Tradition is something very important.
I believe that’s what I just said,
it gets passed down
from coach to players,
to new generations
of coaches and players.
When there is continuity,
it’s much easier.
I think that’s what it’s about.
For Serbia, at this moment,
the best player in the world
is playing. Nikola Jokić.
For Serbia, there is also a man
I coached and for whom I know
what qualities he has as a leader.
That’s Bogdan Bogdanović.
When he’s in the national team,
everything is immediately different.
And all the others who realized that
those two are the two main leaders.
And of course, we have
an experienced coach,
a successful, outstanding coach
on the bench, Kari Pesic.
All of that together leads to the fact
that the national team looks
the way it does and that we are
all in the world of basketball
extremely happy about it.
What else but to wish them
to keep going like this.
And wish the people from the football
national team to achieve the best results.
A nation lives for sport.
We all know what it looks like
at major competitions.
People forget about the rivalry
between the clubs.
Here, Partizan and Zvezda are rivals,
but when the national team plays,
everyone cheers for the national team.
There are also arguments.
Did this one play more, or that one...
But that gets forgotten.
That’s probably something people
in one country, in one state,
will always support always
support someone who gives
their all playing
for the national team.
I’ve been both a player and a coach,
but nothing could ever compare
to preparing for the national team and being
a part of what the national team is.
That’s why it’s called
like that-national team.
You represent one country.
-That’s right.
It’s the greatest honor and pleasure
that an athlete, player, or coach
can experience in their career.
-Yes, that’s the peak.
In football, we have
this responsibility that lasts.
I remember when Ladić defended.
After 1998, he was 35 years old. -Yes.
He wanted to retire,
but the whole country rebelled.
At the same time, several players,
with club careers: "It doesn’t matter."
Simply, that continues.
-It’s different.
In basketball, you have the continuity.
It’s necessary to pass your knowledge.
I’ve never run away from it and
it’s always been a pleasure for me.
There are many famous players
whom I have coached,
and whom I still coach today.
At some point, it becomes tiring.
Not for me, but for the players.
I don’t have any problem.
However, the atmosphere lasts
longer when the players see
a lot of foreign faces.
"Who is this guy, why is he here..."
Their concentration drops. -Yes.
I always try those young coaches
at the seminar to provoke
in order to an interaction happened.
Because as soon as they don't ask
anything, that's not good.
The last seminar, which was
held by our organization
EuroLeague Coaches Association,
Dimitris and I did some offence.
I do the offence,
and he does the defense.
And then we made a change. He was
the attacker, and I was the defense.
There are no secrets there.
The biggest secret is to apply
what you have in you
in relation to the quality
of the players. We talked about it...
The influence of Guardiola,
before that Capello, Trapattoni.
We all followed someone.
The game model is a miracle,
it's just missing Messi or Ronaldo...
Or Jokic. That coach gave him
that game model. -Yes.
Now he's copying Sacramento,
that's what he's doing.
It's the evolution of the game.
This coach in Liverpool who
left is the famous coach Klopp...
Everyone thought what are
we going to do now?
Manchester after Ferguson,
who did miracles,
it can’t be recovered
afterwards for 100 years.
Top players and coaches,
money is invested in that club.
But it isn’t money always
a guarantee in sports.
It plays a very important role.
-That's right.
Real Madrid is not the best,
because they have the money.
Their matches have strong character.
The Bernabeu spirit.
I really believe that.
I was the coach of Real Madrid,
when I was 35 years old.
But in football, it's unbelievable.
-It happened so many times...
That there must be something.
Weird. -I have one more question.
As this is a project for young people,
for parents, players and for everyone...
Mostly for children,
what is your advice for parents,
when they in those years,
and they leave junior school
to professional sports, if they go?
You wanted to go on loan?
That's right.
-The professor didn't allow.
I was on two loans and it's easy
for me to say to the player:
"It was me!" -Yes. -Young player
is young, only if he plays.
If he doesn't play, he gets old.
-That's right. -In one or two years.
You said it all. The most important
thing for young player is to play.
I know how much I suffer,
as a coach and as a man,
when every player can't play
in that game. But it happens.
The last game was played
by 8 players while rotating them.
We played to win, but I'm sad,
when I stay alone, I think…
"Why didn't i give everyone
a chance?" I can't...
But I'm thinking about next game.
I'll give you that chance. Be prepared!
Especially, for a young player.
And always I say:
"Go, play in another league,
or in another club, just play!"
And that's the only advice.
Advice for parents is, let the kids
to develop, children are smart.
Don’t solve through children
your life problems. -Yes.
Well done!
For children to believe that
there are no limits to a man.
But there are no
guarantees either. -No.
Do you know what Nikola Pilić said?
That's a phenomenal statement.
I was a selector...
When he was asked, in tennis,
since that is an individual sport,
can it be more easily judged
whether some 17-year-old
to be the new Becker?
No, I can only know who won't be
the new Becker. That's genius.
Is it true that Jokić passed
under scout  radar?
Is it true that he was not recognized?
-I watched the European Championship.
I was not working that year. That was
in the Czech Republic, in Prague...
When they played the finals
against the Americans
in the World Championship,
Micić and Jokić.
Of course, the American National Team
played pressing the entire game.
We held on well until a certain
moment and then...
The best player of that
World Junior Championship
was this player who playes
with Jokic, in Denver, Gordon.
Now, they are incomparable.
Why he was the best?
He was physically dominant.
Nikola wasn't, and isn't now,
but he is still there on physical level,
and Nicola is the fastest
player in the world.
He makes decisions
before anyone else.
He plays, as I said, chess.
Man is a computer.
It's amazing what he does. Amazing!
Amazing basketball intelligence.
He differs in that. Those
shots of his are not accidental.
He's working on it.
That's what everyone says.
I was surprised...
Three or four years ago I held
a seminar in Opatija with Partizan.
I saw him, because they had
a presentation at the same time.
I greet him and say: "Where are you,
Nikola, how are you, master?"
He says: "Coach, I watched
your seminar from Opatija."
I agree with 95% of things,
and for those 5% they tell me:
"You disagree, Nikola not
even with yourself".
I was incredibly surprised that
he watched my seminar.
I'm talking about dedication,
he was watching some seminar...
The best player in the world,
who dominates...
So, he likes basketball,
he lives for that basketball.
As incredible as it may seem,
he hates talking to journalists.
It can be seen in his every
movement, how dedicated he is.
As you said, there is work,
there is also talent.
Gordon was recognized, Jokić wasn’t.
Does it seem that talent is underrated?
Of course, work is work,
if you're not talented, it's hard.
I agree, someone has talent
when he copies someone who is best.
That's talent number one.
No talent isn't enough, if player
doesn't continue to work.
And the one who works,
and don’t have talent,
reached a certain level.
So, that's the balance.
If you're have talent, and you
work on it, then it's a miracle.
Jokic is that. -Jokić? -And Bogdanović,
Bojan Bogdanović, too.
They all ended up there.
I was lucky to play with: Toni
Kukoč, late Dražen, Divac,
Paljo, Rađa, Danilović, Đorđević...
During Yugoslavia, the talent
was neglected and belittled.
Work was despised, it was,
"let them run, we know"...
It seems to me that today everything
is measured by physical parameters.
Sport has changed, it's getting
faster, players are stronger.
However, I watched my players.
There are some rubber bands
everywhere, they stretch...
One day we practiced penalty kicks.
The game begins, three out of twelve.
I tell them to leave rubber bands
and take the ball.
It's basketball, the ball need to go
through the hoop, forget that.
But, of course, in this training
process, games and traveling,
players must take care of their bodies,
everything is clear why it is done.
The essence of sport is what I said,
when a player enters the court,
doesn't take his stand,
but takes a shot.
As many shots as possible,
it is easier later on.
This is how self-confidence is gained.
When your arm start hurting.
That's what Kića said...
"I didn't go out until my arm hurt,
when it hurts, then I leave".
It doesn't matter if it's 500 or 1000.
Who was the best freekicker?
The one who stayed and worked.
And who did bicycle dribbling
in football. -Exactly.
That's automatism. -That's what
you are saying a moment ago...
That dedication or whatever to do.
Even if you are Jordan, Modrić,
Obradović, Ronaldo, Tesla, De Niro...
That dedication, that's not work,
that's obsession, obsessiveness.
We can name it that.
-That's right, that's it.
Željko, in the end I have
to say something...
You are truly unique.
I don't make a mistery out my work.
I deal with it. Successfull people
have some luck at a given moment.
Some more, some less,
some are better at some things,
and some are better at other things,
but you are unique.
You are the most trophy-winning
coach in ball sports,
and an extraordinary man.
Unique and complete.
And you are, at the same time,
cold and decisive,
but warm and paternal,
calculated and pragmatic.
But, also you are emotionally
and passionate, rational and intuitive.
It's hard to explain,
except to say that you are complete.
You know who explained it best,
Duško Vujošević.
A great coach and man
with wise thinking, he said…
"I have a friend Voja Stanić,
98-year-old painter.
Vojo says that a man should live two
lives. The first life, to live and to sin.
And other, to live properly,
without failure.
This is another life for Željko.
All this what is happening to him,
how he behaves, as agreed,
decisions which he makes,
he already lived."
That's just the way it is.
Yes, I know about that statement.
Thanks, I was going to interrupt you.
With so many compliments
I will look like I do in my games.
You are embarrasing me...
Thank you very much.
This isn’t your first time
to talk about me like that.
I know, when you were in Turkey,
when you gave those statements.
In the great city of Istanbul,
due to obligations we had,
we didn't manage to see each other.
Thanks to the people who are
leading this phenomenal project.
It is an incredible pleasure
to talk to you.
Indeed, as I said, it is no joke,
you are extremely talented for this job.
You have experiences that are rare.
Once again, thank you
for your wonderful words.
I hope that this project,
in which you and I participate,
will be better and better
and that it will bring
young people closer together.
It’s the most valuable idea of ​​all.
That these spaces get another dimension.
So that we can all succeed together,
to get to know each other and
hang out as much as possible.
Thank you, Željko. -Thank you.